<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:drama">
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander:</td>
								<td>When will you finish Campaspe?</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apelles:</td>
								<td>Never finish: for always in absolute beauty there is somewhat above art.</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<cite>—<span epub:type="z3998:surname">Lyly</span>’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Campaspe</i></cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>And now, what song should I sing to unveil my Isis, if indeed she was present unseen? I hurried away to the white hall of Phantasy, heedless of the innumerable forms of beauty that crowded my way: these might cross my eyes, but the unseen filled my brain. I wandered long, up and down the silent space: no songs came. My soul was not still enough for songs. Only in the silence and darkness of the soul’s night, do those stars of the inward firmament sink to its lower surface from the singing realms beyond, and shine upon the conscious spirit. Here all effort was unavailing. If they came not, they could not be found.</p>
			<p>Next night, it was just the same. I walked through the red glimmer of the silent hall; but lonely as there I walked, as lonely trod my soul up and down the halls of the brain. At last I entered one of the statue-halls. The dance had just commenced, and I was delighted to find that I was free of their assembly. I walked on till I came to the sacred corner. There I found the pedestal just as I had left it, with the faint glimmer as of white feet still resting on the dead black. As soon as I saw it, I seemed to feel a presence which longed to become visible; and, as it were, called to me to gift it with self-manifestation, that it might shine on me. The power of song came to me. But the moment my voice, though I sang low and soft, stirred the air of the hall, the dancers started; the quick interweaving crowd shook, lost its form, divided; each figure sprang to its pedestal, and stood, a self-evolving life no more, but a rigid, lifelike, marble shape, with the whole form composed into the expression of a single state or act. Silence rolled like a spiritual thunder through the grand space. My song had ceased, scared at its own influences. But I saw in the hand of one of the statues close by me, a harp whose chords yet quivered. I remembered that as she bounded past me, her harp had brushed against my arm; so the spell of the marble had not infolded it. I sprang to her, and with a gesture of entreaty, laid my hand on the harp. The marble hand, probably from its contact with the uncharmed harp, had strength enough to relax its hold, and yield the harp to me. No other motion indicated life.</p>
			<p>Instinctively I struck the chords and sang. And not to break upon the record of my song, I mention here, that as I sang the first four lines, the loveliest feet became clear upon the black pedestal; and ever as I sang, it was as if a veil were being lifted up from before the form, but an invisible veil, so that the statue appeared to grow before me, not so much by evolution, as by infinitesimal degrees of added height. And, while I sang, I did not feel that I stood by a statue, as indeed it appeared to be, but that a real woman-soul was revealing itself by successive stages of imbodiment, and consequent manifestation and expression.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Feet of beauty, firmly planting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arches white on rosy heel!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence the life-spring, throbbing, panting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pulses upward to reveal!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fairest things know least despising;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foot and earth meet tenderly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis the woman, resting, rising</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upward to sublimity,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Rise the limbs, sedately sloping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong and gentle, full and free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft and slow, like certain hoping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawing nigh the broad firm knee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to speech! As up to roses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pants the life from leaf to flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So each blending change discloses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nearer still, expression’s power.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! fair sweeps, white surges, twining</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up and outward fearlessly!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Temple columns, close combining,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lift a holy mystery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heart of mine! what strange surprises</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mount aloft on such a stair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some great vision upward rises,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Curving, bending, floating fair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bands and sweeps, and hill and hollow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lead my fascinated eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some apocalypse will follow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some new world of deity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zoned unseen, and outward swelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With new thoughts and wonders rife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Queenly majesty foretelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">See the expanding house of life!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sudden heaving, unforbidden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sighs eternal, still the same⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mounts of snow have summits hidden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the mists of uttered flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the spirit, dawning nearly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finds no speech for earnest pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finds a soundless sighing merely⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Builds its stairs, and mounts again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Heart, the queen, with secret hoping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sendeth out her waiting pair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hands, blind hands, half blindly groping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Half inclasping visions rare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the great arms, heartways bending;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might of Beauty, drawing home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There returning, and re-blending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where from roots of love they roam.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Build thy slopes of radiance beamy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirit, fair with womanhood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tower thy precipice, white-gleamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Climb unto the hour of good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dumb space will be rent asunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now the shining column stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ready to be crowned with wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the builder’s joyous hands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All the lines abroad are spreading,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a fountain’s falling race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, the chin, first feature, treading,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Airy foot to rest the face!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speech is nigh; oh, see the blushing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet approach of lip and breath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round the mouth dim silence, hushing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waits to die ecstatic death.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Span across in treble curving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bow of promise, upper lip!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set them free, with gracious swerving;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let the wing-words float and dip.</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Dumb art thou?</i> O Love immortal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than words thy speech must be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Childless yet the tender portal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the home of melody.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now the nostrils open fearless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud in calm unconsciousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure it must be something peerless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the great Pan would express!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deepens, crowds some meaning tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the pure, dear lady-face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, a blinding burst of splendor!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis the free soul’s issuing grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Two calm lakes of molten glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Circling round unfathomed deeps!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lightning-flashes, transitory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cross the gulfs where darkness sleeps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This the gate, at last, of gladness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the outward striving <i>me</i>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a rain of light and sadness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out its loves and longings flee!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With a presence I am smitten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dumb, with a foreknown surprise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presence greater yet than written</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even in the glorious eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the gulfs, with inward gazes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I may look till I am lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wandering deep in spirit-mazes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a sea without a coast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Windows open to the glorious!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Time and space, oh, far beyond!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woman, ah! thou art victorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I perish, overfond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Springs aloft the yet Unspoken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the forehead’s endless grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of silences unbroken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infinite, unfeatured face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Domes above, the mount of wonder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Height and hollow wrapt in night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hiding in its caverns under</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woman-nations in their might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passing forms, the highest Human</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faints away to the Divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Features none, of man or woman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can unveil the holiest shine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sideways, grooved porches only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Visible to passing eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand the silent, doorless, lonely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entrance-gates of melody.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all sounds fly in as boldly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Groan and song, and kiss and cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At their galleries, lifted coldly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Darkly, ’twixt the earth and sky.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beauty, thou art spent, thou knowest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, in faint, half-glad despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the summit thou o’erflowest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a fall of torrent hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hiding what thou hast created</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a half-transparent shroud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, with glory soft-abated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shines the moon through vapory cloud.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
